Dentures 
A shift in the oral cavity equilibrium has direct impact over the general health. Missing teeth either 
do to Caries or gum disease can be one of the cue factors that causes an unbalanced oral cavity 
equilibrium. Dentures are custom made replacement of the missing teeth and surrounding tissues
for functional as well as aesthetic purposes. Dentures are given after 8 to 12 weeks of teeth 
extractions after the bone has matured.
There are two types of dentures:
 Complete dentures and Partial dentures
Complete dentures are for those people with all teeth missing in upper or lower jaw i.e a completely 
edentulous arch and it resembles more or less the natural dentition . 
Partial dentures are given if some natural teeth still present in upper or lower jaw.,i.e partially
edentulous arch.
•	Complete dentures
They can be either definitive or immediate. Definitive denture is given after 8 to 12 weeks when the 
gum tissue over and around the teeth removed has healed completely. Whereas the immediate 
dentures are made in advance to the removal of teeth and given immediately after teeth removal
hence no time lag . But the major disadvantage of these dentures are that they exert lot of stress 
over the alveolar bone leading to excessive bone loss. They are considered temporary.
•	Partial dentures
They are either fixed or removable . Always the first treatment of choice is fixed bridges.
Fixed bridges can only be given if teeth is present on either side of the missing teeth space. If not, 
then removable dentures are preferred. Bridges are teeth supported dentures whereas removable
dentures ae tissue supported sometimes having a metal clasp extension to take support from 
adjacent teeth. In bridges, Artificial teeth is attached to the crowns which are cemented on the 
teeth on either side of the the missing space . Among the removable dentures , flexible denture is 
more convenient for the wearer when compared to the normal dentures. Other factors in 
determining fixed or removable dentures include age of the patient, economical status, oral hygiene, 
neurological conditions ,gum diseases and extend of bone loss.
Implant or dentures
Dental implants can be used to support dentures for retention and stability, , they can be used to 
support bridges . They are an alternative to the dentures but not everyone can have implants. The
cost is also usually high. Dental Implants are fixtures surgically inserted into the jawbone ,acting as 
anchors to the teeth to be replaced.
Your dentist can guide and recommend you the best treatment option suitable for you.
Steps to make a denture
Complete denture development process takes about few weeks and several appointments. Partial 
dentures takes few days and comparatively less appointments .
General steps include :
1. Impression is taken of both the jaws and their relation to each other also recorded
2. Models are made and ‘try in ‘ done for assessing the fit, color, shape and proper bite before 
final denture fabrication
3. Final denture is then fabricated finished and polished and delivered 
Concerns of new denture wearers
It is normal to feel odd during the initial days of denture wearing. It takes few weeks to acclimatize
and feel comfort with the new denture. You will also have trouble in wearing and removing the 
denture in the starting days but practicing the same will make it more easy in few days. Also, its not 
unusual to have discomfort while speaking, irritation , soreness or ulcers on the overlying tissue .All 
these problems dimishes in few days when your mouth gets adjusted to the denture.
Can we eat wearing dentures?
Of course yes. Dentures are not just for aesthetic purposes. They are also meant to restore 
functional stability of mouth. New denture wearers should start with soft food to get used to the 
dentures. You can return back to the normal diet once you are adjusted with the dentures. Its is 
advised to avoid chewy or sticky food for denture wearers.
Why remove dentures during night?
AS we all know dentures are made of chemical material hence if you wear it 24 hours a day there are 
more chances of chemical irritation . Hence it is adviced to remove your dentures before going to 
bed and keep them immersed in normal water at room temperature. Never keep your denture 
exposed to dry air. They dry out and lose the shape leading to fitting issues. Removing dentures
during night allows the tissues to rest and normal stimulation of oral tissue .
Post insertion instruction for denture wearers
Proper caring of denture is very important for maintaining good oral hygiene .
• Dentures should be handled carefully to prevent any breakage
• One should brush and rinse the denture daily to remove food debris and plaque. Dentures
can be stained from the food and beverages hence proper brushing with soft bristled 
denture cleaning brushes is necessary.
• Denture cleansing tablets are available in the market. They are dispersed in water and 
dentures are immersed in the solution for some time as recommended.
• Never use hot water for cleaning the dentures
• Always brush your teeth and massage your gums and oral tissue regularly in the morning for 
stimulation before wearing the dentures.
• Visit your dentist regularly for examination
Can the dentures be repaired?
Some dentures can be repaired. Be sure to consult your dentist if your denture is ill fitting or have 
cracks. Do not try to fix it yourself with normal over-the-counter glue which can cause chemical 
burning of oral tissue. Your dentist may send them to the lab for repair .
Are dentures expensive?
There are various types of dentures depending on the quality of materials used and the aesthetic 
property of the artificial teeth used. Hence the price range also varies accordingly giving you multiple
options to choose.
Dentures are always cost effective and affordable.
Contact our doctors at  <a href="https://apollogulf.com/dentistry">AMC dental clinic abudhabi</a>  to learn more about dental related issues.

                                                                                                                            Written by
                                                                                                                           Dr ATHIRA PALAMADTHIL
